Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always Ricard Loup. And
today I'm joined for a second time by Doctor
Luis Favela, associate Professor of Philosophy and Cognitive Sciences
at the University of Central Florida. And today we're
talking about his book, The Ecological Brain Unifying The
Sciences of Brain, body and Environment. And by the
way, I'm leaving a link to our first interview
in the description box down below which is which
to a certain extent is also relevant to the
interview today. So Doctor Favela, welcome back to the
show. It's always a pleasure to talk to you.
Thank you Ricardo. I appreciate the invitation looking forward
to it.
So I, I mean, the way I would like
to go through things here today is that uh
first of all, I would like to get into
what ecological psychology and neuroscience are because those are
the two main disciplines that you explore in the
book and also the relationship between them and how
they historically sort of came apart theoretically, methodologically and
so on and then get into the framework that
you bring into the book that you present there
that perhaps can bring them back together and perhaps
other aspects of our psychology. And so to start
off with what is ecological psychology? Really?
Yeah. So I think when, um, people hear the
term ecological psychology, I think if they think of
anything they think of, um, psychology related to the
environment. And so commonly when I talk to people,
they've said, oh, so you study, uh how productive
people are depending on what color their room is.
So if their room is painted red, then that
means the ecology causes them to be angry and
agitated. And I'm like, well, maybe, but that's not
what we mean here in this case. So, uh
when I say ecological psychology, I'm referring to a
tradition and perceptual psychology uh that originates with James
Gibson in the mid 20th century around the 19
fifties. Um And also with his uh spouse Eleanor
Gibson, also around at the same time. So ecological
psychology was a bit of a reaction to um
the uh more popular um or increasingly popular approaches
to perception uh around the mid 20th century. And
so around that time, you had something called the
cognitive revolution. And so the cognitive revolution was pushing
back against uh behaviorist approaches. And so behaviorism in
the late 18 hundreds, early 19 hundreds argued that
um if there's anything to, to a mind or
to be mental, really, what matters for a scientific
study of that is what can be observed in
behavior. And so the idea was we can try
to explain even the most complex behaviors by things
like a, a reflex or stimulus response uh rules
um that an organism develops over its lifetime or
even over eve evolutionary time scales, the cognitive revolution
came along and said, well, that's, you know, kind
of interesting and you can explain a lot of
stuff that way, but there seems to be a
lot of mental things happening that you can't explain
just by looking at the environment and then the,
the response that the organism has. And so Noam
Chomsky has this famous pushback argument against behaviorism uh
where he said, um the environment is too impoverished,
it's too poor with information for uh example, language
learning. So an infant that's starting to learn language,
um even if it's exposed much of the day
to his parents talking and family talking, that doesn't
seem to be enough to account for the richness
and the seemingly infinite combination of words that a
human being learns how to use. And so Chomsky
and others that came along later. So there must
be some things that are already built into the
mind. And so, yeah, maybe there's stimulus in the
environment and then there are responses from the organism,
but those responses are gonna be based on innate
structures that are already in the brain. And so
the launched a whole new paradigm, if you will
a whole new way of doing psychology which said,
we don't have to treat the inside of the
organism like a black box, right? Where you have
your input, some magic happens and then you get
an output. No, we can start looking at those
structures. And around that time also what became popular
was uh computers. So the computational devices were becoming
more and more popular. And people said, wow, you
know, computers, they, they, they have these like internal
rules and they can, you know, give them certain
kind of inputs and they get really complex outputs
and it seems like you can mix that up
and almost infinite ways. And so that there was
a marriage between these different approaches, um artificial intelligence
at the time, linguistics and some other sub fields
as well. And they came together and they said,
well, then things like perception must also require some
internal uh properties as well. And so you can't
really explain something like detecting distance just based on
the stimulus. Because for example, if you had a
little tree that was up close to you or
you had a big tree that was far away
from you, if all that it requires for vision
is the information and the environment. Well, the little
tree and the big tree on the same line
would cast the same image on your retinal cells.
So you wouldn't be able to tell they would
look the same spot. Thus, we must have certain
rules in our mind that allows us to maybe
take cues from the environment. Um uh We see
things that maybe, maybe in the angles of shadows
or something like that might tell us that something
is further away than it is closer. So computers
and the idea that you would represent the environment
in your mind and then manipulate it computationally. This
became the dominant way of doing things in the
mid 20th century. Well, here comes ecological psychology, sorry
for all the history, but you kind of need
to know some of that to, to appreciate what
Gibson was doing.
A and by the way, just to mention that
in our first interview, we talked more extensively about
computational representational approaches. So we if people want to
go back there and watch that be that bit
again because it provides even more con context, I
guess to what we're talking about here. So,
yeah, exactly. Yeah. Thank you, Ricardo. Um So Gibson
said, well, um he was, he was actually he
was a, a scientist uh in the army and
in, in the US military. And he was um
tasked with trying to help develop training better training
methods for pilots because he said pilots, they were
treating uh the environment like a Cartesian coordinate system
where it's just abstract kind of space of three
dimensions on an A season. So uh if you
want to land your plane and survive, uh you
want to think of yourself as one point in
that coordinate system and then the landing field and
the plane and another part of that coordinate system,
and then you try and calculate that. Well, it
turns out the pilots were really bad at learning
to fly that way. So he said, well, what
do pilots actually do when they land successfully? He
said they actually pay attention to what the environment
is doing in relation to themselves. And so he
picked up on the notion of optic flow as
something that guides uh the ability of pilots to
land. And he said, maybe if we train the
pilots to focus on optic flow, so that's when
the environment is moving in your your space of
vision. If we tell them focus on the optic
flow of the runway, and we try and coordinate
our sense of our body in relation to that
optic flow, maybe people will land better and it
turns out that it did, it worked out better
for them to think of things in, in that
sense instead of the abstract sense. So this is
one of the early also approaches um that became
known as embodied cognition or embodied mind, the idea
that you get your sense of body or your
app proprioception and your haptic senses as a way
of gaining information about the world. And so what
did Gibson then do from this simple lesson? He
said, well, maybe, maybe the environment actually is rich
with information, maybe um organisms don't represent the world
in their minds as much as we think they
do if at all, maybe what they do is
they leverage things like optic flow or the ambient
light in a room or things like that. And
so how do we know that the little tree
is up close and the big tree is further
away? Well, we know that because of information in
the environment like parallax, the parallax is what happens
when something uh is up close. And if you're
moving, it seems like it's moving faster. If something
is far away and you're moving at the same
speed, it seems like it's moving slower. So if
you've been in a car or on a train
and you look outside and you look down and
you see the road moving really fast, but then
you look at the distance and it looks like
the mountains are barely moving at all. That's parallax.
And that information is in the environment. It's nothing
that's represented in the brain or in the mind.
So Gibson launched this whole new approach to doing
perceptual psychology based on the idea that the environment
is not impoverished the way Chomsky and the cognitive
revolution uh neuros or scientists said, but that we
can actually use the environment to um inform even
complex actions. And so from there, here's the last
main bit from there, he developed the term uh
affordances. And so I think uh this is a
common term now outside of ecological psychology, roboticists, people
in education, all sorts of different people in art
design, they use the term afford it uh loosely
what it means is opportunities to do things in
the world. So when I see this cup in
front of me with little paints of Nietzsche on
it, it affords grasping if the features of the
object and my body have a nice match, right?
If the cup is too tiny for my fingers
or if it's gigantic and I can't grab it,
then it does not afford grasping. And so Gibson
said, it's likely that any organism that is perceiving
the world from a little ant to a grasshopper
to a dog, to a chimp to a human
is likely perceiving opportunities to do things in the
world. And those opportunities are constrained by the organisms
sense of its body. So it's embodiment and then
information in the environment. So that's what ecological psychology
in this case boils down to the idea of
an organism, environment system that can act intelligently in
the world based on embodiment and environmental or ecological
information.
And so that's about ecological psychology. But then how
does neuroscience get into the picture of what you
explore in your book? Uh Perhaps, I mean, we
have to go through some of the main historical
developments here as well uh to then understand why
it is that psychology uh or ecological psychology and
neuroscience uh theoretically conceptually and methodologically, at least at
first sight seem irreconcilable.
Yeah. So the uh historical story that I try
to tell uh in the book is one in
which you've got multiple strands of research happening uh
investigating mind in different ways. Um So there are
people do perceptual psychology, for example, you know, there
are gyps ecological psychology, cognitive psychologists and the like
and so, neuroscience. Um uh AND again, this is
just painting in broad strokes, right? So there's always
gonna be exceptions and things like that. But painting
in broad strokes, neuroscience is very much um what
I'll call it a anatomical or physiological discipline. I
was interested in what are the um the bodily
constituents of the nervous system, right? What are, what
are nerve cells? What are neurons? What are glial
cells? How do they work? How do they act?
And so fast forwarding a bit. How do those
anatomical units connect to things like intelligent behavior or
memory or problem solving? And so, as I try
to tell in the book Neuroscience, especially things like
Perceptual Neuroscience or cognitive neuroscience, things more concerned with
um the type of phenomena that are studied in
psychology, for example, um they inherited a lot of
the uh theoretical approaches from the cognitive revolution. So
the cognitive revolution sparked this approach which uh we
call cognitive and cognitive is was the idea that
cognition, uh intelligent behavior, perception, memory, um the control
of movement, co-ordinated movement. All these things are essentially
computational and representational in nature. And So as I
mentioned a few minutes ago, the idea is that
uh it's not just stimulus from the environment and
response uh from whatever is happening in the body.
And you don't need to pay attention to what's
happening in the brain, right? The black box. But
inside here are computations that are manipulating representations. So
when I speak a language, I have representations of
words and sounds, the computations organize those in certain
ways that give me uh language comprehension, for example.
So as I argue in the book, Neuroscience inherited
this way of thinking about uh organisms as these
brains or neurons or nervous systems that are conducting
computations and they're manipulating representations of the world. And
so when you think about a computer that manipulates
bits like ones and zeros, right? So whenever you
write a computer program, it's made up of strings
of ones and zeros and certain kinds of ones
and zeros give you a tiktok video or one
gives you music or one gives you a game
you're gonna play, it's all still ones and zeros.
And so the idea was that neurons which were
thought of as simple firing units. So they either
fire or they don't. So they set off an
action potential. Maybe theoretically speaking, neuroscientists are history club,
maybe those spikes can be thought of as like
a one. And when it's not spiking, it's like
a zero and so taken together, you know, these
millions and millions of spiking ones and zeros are
like the millions and millions of zeros and ones
in a computer. And so the brain must be
a kind of computational device. So Neuroscience inherits this
way of thinking about thinking uh thinking about nervous
systems as essentially a kind of wet computer, right?
It's not made out of silicon, like my macbook,
but it's made out of, you know, cells and
blood and water and proteins and all this kind
of stuff. But essentially it's doing the same thing
as a computer. Now. Where did the split come
in between neuroscience and ecological psychology? Well, right from
the beginning, right, from the start, there's a big
split and the big split is that neuroscience inherits
this view that the environment is too impoverished to
provide a kind of information that can guide intelligent
action, for example, whereas the ecological psychologist says the
environment is rich with information which can guide intelligent
behavior and action. And so right there from the
start, you have one fundamental break that happens right
there. The neuroscience test is put in uh their,
their bets on the cognitive this theory and they're
saying it's gonna be all about what's happening in
the brain or the, or the, you know, cognitive
system. The ecological psychologist is gonna say actually what's
gonna happen is it's gonna be distributed throughout the
body, which includes a brain, but mostly the overt
kind of gross body and the environment itself. So
they're coming at some of the same targets of
investigation, like visual perception, for example, and they are
coming from very different uh starting points and theoretical
commitments. And so you see that at least since
maybe the 19 seventies or so 19 eighties, that
this big split between these two approaches and it
would seem that they are irreconcilable. They're, they're in
some ways, as I say in the book, in
some ways, they are different worlds, right? For the
ecological psychologist, the world is full of affordances and
rich information that's real, right? For the neuroscientists, right?
What's really real is what's happening in the mind
which equals the brain. And so this is just
very radical ways of, of approaching um doing the
same kind of work.
And by the way related to those theoretical slash
conceptual foundations that differ between ecological psychology and neuroscience,
one of the things that you also explore in
the book, in this case regarding neuroscience is that
you talk about two different traditions in neuroscience. And
uh I would like you to tell us about
them and then perhaps explain why does it matter
in the context of your book? So one of
them is focused on biological features of neurons that
is the Hodgkin Ley tradition. And the other one
more on abstract features of neurons, the mccullough pits
tradition. So what are those traditions really about in
what ways do they differ? And why does it
matter for your book specifically?
Yeah, great, great um question. I'm glad you, you
asked that. So, as I said, the earlier days
of neuroscience that I presented in the book and
this very broad sketches, it's very focused on anatomy
uh and looking at what the anatomy itself is
like. And so uh Hodgkin and Huxley did this
pioneering work um in the, you know, mid 20th
century where they created some of the earlier models
of single neuron activity. And so they looked at
uh squid neurons. Um uh SQUID was a a
great case because their neurons and their axons were
so big that they could actually feed them with
uh very simple microscopes. They wouldn't need these like
high powered electron microscope. So they could test the
anatomy in a in a in a in a
pretty broad, highly detailed way. And what they focused
on was what are the contributions of different kind
of molecular activity, calcium, uh things like that. Um
And what's happening when the cell is acting in
a way to say, make you know, the tentacle
move or something like that. What they found was
this is a very dynamic kind of activity, right?
This is a temporal activity, right? So there's time
before the neuron fires and there's build up and
there's activity and and say the calcium channels and
things like that in there and then it hits
a certain point and then boom, you get the
spike of activity and then it kind of dissipates
and it's prepared for another spike, right? And so
this was a very temporal kind of way of
thinking about it. So earlier days of Neuroscience, some
of the biggest achievements focused on the combination of
anatomy and dynamics or time around the same period
uh in history, you had some other pioneering work
happening by a, a couple of um gentlemen mcculloch
and Pitts and what they said was let's try
and think about uh abstractly what's happening here. So
how do we um reconceive the anatomy in mathematical
terms, though not modeling the anatomy, not modeling the
activity with mathematical tools, but thinking about what the
anatomy is doing as calculating as a kind of
mathematical kind of phenomenon. So they developed um some
the earliest mathematical models of uh neural activity. So
the mcculloch Pitts model um and they treated uh
these models as simple on and off switches, right?
So the the neural network as we come to
talk about them today, neural network models, right? It's
a collection of these ones and zeros or that
these systems that are weighted, right? And it's all
mathematical. And so this mcculloch hits of the quick
little aside that work was foundational to um the
popular kind of models that we see now known
as like large language models. So chat GP T
um all these different kinds of systems that are
so popular and and and controversial in the news
lately, these are all defendants of the mcculloch Pitts
model which treated cognition and thinking as essentially kind
of like a mathematical phenomenon. It's all about calculations.
So you have these two traditions that were being
practiced. And I think it's fair to say that
the Macao Pits tradition which focused on the mathematics
and the computations and the abstraction away from the
anatomy. That's definitely the one that has become the
most popular. Again. Look at the successes of neural
network models like, you know, chat GP T and
stuff like that for the purposes of the book.
Though I point out that um and this is
related to another paper that I wrote called the
Dynamical Renaissance in Neuroscience is that while there has
been a great popularity in the abstraction away from
neurons and into developing these neural networks, there's also
been a refocusing as well on the dynamics and
the timing of neural systems. And so what we're
seeing is more and more focus on uh nonlinear
dynamics, things like that um as being essential to
nervous systems. And so it's not just about like
what calculations they're producing, which don't really matter, like
how fast they go or how slow they go.
It's just a number of steps and you can
do the steps fast, you can do the steps
slow, but you get the same output. But there's
been a new appreciation for this earlier work which
I call the Hot and Huxley tradition that says
it's not just about the steps, but it's also
about how fast they happen or how slow they
happen. And so this renaissance of as I call
it and I talk about in the book is
that neuroscience is repaying attention to the dynamics of
what's happening in cognitive systems, intelligence systems and perception.
Um I forget if you had a, a another
part of your question. Uh
No, no, but I, I actually want to ask
you a follow up. So just to see if
I understood it correctly, then these emphasis on abstract
features of neurons actually something that in more recent
times as lether or at least some people in
the cognitive sciences, neuroscience and so on to a
more uh dynamical systems approach to uh cognition, psychology
and so on. Is that correct or?
Well? So sometimes. So um if I understood the
question correctly, are people who are focusing on the
abstract computations of uh neural systems of cognitive systems?
Are they now including dynamics? Um Sometimes they are
but not always necessarily and ST as vice versa,
people who focus on the dynamics are not focusing
on the computational properties per se. So there is
some overlap but not necessarily. So. Um Yeah.
Mhm No, I was just trying to really understand
here and perhaps to some extent I was oversimplifying
it, but I was uh since you mentioned the
dynamical Renen in cognitive science and neuroscience, uh I
was just wondering if really abstracting more from uh
neurons for more from their biological features, not focusing
too much on them would help moving beyond these.
I don't know, perhaps brain centered approach and uh
computational representational approach to uh cognition, neuroscience and so
on.
Well, it's interesting, I think um there's people who
have used the same evidence to make different conclusions.
So some people have argued that um you know,
because nervous systems and take, you know, humans and
other mammals um because what really matters to intelligence
and perception and memory and all this stuff is
the computations in the nervous system. It doesn't really
matter. Um If it's in a mammal, it, it
could be, you know, in a bird, it could
be an insect, it could be in a computer,
it could be, you know, I don't know, in
a ghost made out of ectoplasm or something like
that. I don't know. Whereas other people have said
no, no, no, no, no. What the nervous system
is doing is a spec you know, special kind
of computation that's, you know, specific to, you know,
brains and there's something very special about brains. Now
where the dynamics come in that just adds another
layer, right? Some people say, what's the computations and
the dynamics that prove this, what's the computations and
dynamics that prove that it's been really tough to,
to say uh who's right and who's wrong in
those debates? Mhm
Yeah. A actually, yeah. Now, now that you're mentioning
that uh you're right. So sometimes when there's discussion
surrounding uh uh the extent to which uh artificial
intelligence, artificial intelligence systems can be or become humanlike,
there's that idea that perhaps if it's uh just
about computations, I mean, the same computations can be
instantiated in silicon based uh cognitive systems as they
are in carbon based cognitive systems. Right. Mhm. I
guess.
Yeah. Absolutely. Yeah. That's right.
So, but then, uh, we were talking about uh
ecological psychology as well and the relationship or the
lack thereof with ecological psychology and neuroscience. But then
there's also ecological neuroscience. So what is it? And
what's basically the theoretical background behind it?
Yeah. So ecological neuroscience um is a term um
used loosely, there's no official kind of discipline called
ecological neuroscience. Ecological Neuroscience term used to refer to
people who are attempting to try and bring together
uh these seemingly disparate and irreconcilable approaches to understanding
cognition and perception. So what they wanna do, they
wanna see if the lessons from Gibson and ecological
psychology can be uh integrated with uh what we
know about the nervous system. And so you've got
work um going back at least to the 19
eighties in which people are paying more attention uh
by people. I mean, ecological psychologists are paying more
attention to the contributions of the nervous system and
brain to things like afford its perception. Now, iii
I really need to stress um a couple of
things here. So one is that Gibson um James
Gibson and his spouse Eleanor Gibson, they were really
pushing back against the dominant approach, the dominant approach
that you just, you gotta look at the brain,
the brain is awesome and computers are awesome. And
we've got all this technology, we have put all
this stuff together and that's where, you know, we're
really gonna be explaining things and I think at
least strategically, um you know, the Gibsons especially, you
know, James Gibson and his work on perception was
like, we're not even gonna really talk about the
brain, right? We're not gonna really talk about that.
Like, of course, you know, mammals, the chimpanzee has
a brain, of course, it has a nervous system,
of course, it controls movement with its nervous system
and, and, and, and brain. But really what matters
is that we need to really appreciate the role
of the body and the role of the environment.
And so, um by not talking about the brain
and not emphasizing the nervous system, this led a
uh uh a lot of people to think that
uh ecological psychologists uh didn't believe in brains that
they ignored brains that they thought maybe that they
just didn't exist. Uh So, for example, um Daniel
Dennett, the philosopher, cognitive scientist, uh he's get some
quotes from some writings he did in the eighties
uh where he said, you know, people like Gibson,
they treat the brain as if it's a piece
of wonder tissue it's, it's like it's magical. We
don't even need to explain really how it works
or that there's neurons. It doesn't, it's just, it's
magical. It's a magical part of the body and
it resonates magically with for ins and things like
that. Other people like Carl Pribram also in the
19 eighties. Uh He has this other uh great
quote and I say great cause it's, you know,
it's something special. He says, uh you know, there
are some ecological psychologists that acknowledge that there's a
brain and nervous system. But for people like James
Gibson, uh whether you know, there's really that stuff
on the inside or just foam rubber, it makes
no difference to their theory, right? And so you've
got Dennett who thinks uh the Gibsons ecological psychologists
are wowed by the magic of the brain. So
they don't even want to touch it or talk
about it. And you've got people like prem and
other people who are like they, I just think
that it doesn't even matter. You could, you could
fill, you know, you could just, you know, scoop
out all my brain and fill it with rubber
and it wouldn't make any difference to my ability
to perceive for since, right. So Gibson, an ecological
psychologist had a really hard time uh with trying
to explain things like perception without doing what everyone
else was doing, which was talking about the brain
and talking about complications. So, um I think that's
really important to, to, to acknowledge that. So, ecological
neuroscience was this attempt to say, hey, we have
it as ecological psychologists really focused on the brain
and specifically what the brain is doing. Um We
don't think that it doesn't matter if it's a
brain or foam rubber, like no, no brains matter,
right? Brains matter. They're important. Are they computing like
a computer? Are they representing the environment um in
little pictures in the head? And that's how we
control things like action and my ability to grab,
you know, the avoidance of this cup. Is it
really about computing and representing? No, it's not, but
the brain is doing something. Let's see what it's
doing. So, ecological psychologists were interested in trying to
see what is the nervous system activity that is
going along with things like hance perception and that
was some of the early kind of ecological neuroscience
work. Um I can leave it at that for
now. Yeah.
Sure. So uh I, I think that we've already
covered uh lots of theoretical and historical background here.
Uh I want to get into the main thesis
that you develop in your book. I guess that
before that we just need to talk a little
bit about complexity science here. We've already talked about
ecological psychology and neuroscience, how they relate how they
split historically and then also ecology, neuroscience and traditions
in neuroscience. So perhaps uh that's enough about it
if you have something else to add about it,
please go ahead. But uh getting into complexity science,
I mean, we've already again, talked a lot about
it in our first interview. So I refer to
it again. But what role does it play in
the context of the thesis you develop in your
book? Exactly.
Yeah. So um I think historically, part of the
problem with bringing together ecological psychology and neuroscience is
that they just have very different ways of talking
about the world and they have different methods and
different tools that they use. So my thinking was
what if we start bringing them together by applying
a similar kind of investigative approach. Uh AAA similar
set of concepts, a similar set of methods that
both ecological psychologists and neuroscientists can both agree on
and use and maybe that can be a way
to bring them together. So to that end, um
I thought that complexity science offered those concepts and
those tools that are applicable to the very little.
So the neurons in the brain, to the very
big, just an organism acting in the world. And
so um this is not anything especially unique to
me because the fact is that if you look
at the ecological psychology literature and you look at
the neuroscience literature, there are people who have been
trying to pull little bits from complexity science because
it's such a broadly applicable set of tools. So
complexity science is um made up of a lot
of sub disciplines. But in short, it tends to
include things like systems theory. Um So the idea
from like cybernetics and things like that of the
importance of feedback loops in systems. Uh It takes
a lot from nonlinear dynamical systems theory. So these
tools that have been developed to capture very complicated
um types of temporal uh behaviors and systems, right?
And so all these different kinds of of tools
have come together into complexity science to allow you
to say I'm gonna study what the neuron is
doing while an organism is perceiving and afford it.
And I can talk about the neuron and the
body and the environment in very similar ways. I
can use very similar tools. And that's the what
the role of complexity science plays um in my
approach.
And so tell us then about what you call
in the book, the next framework that is the
neuro ecological nexus theory framework. So what is it
about? Exactly?
Yeah. So the uh neuro ecological nexus theory is,
you know, my attempt at synthesizing really the best
of ecological psychology, the best of neuroscience and the
tools and concepts from complexity science into a way
in which we can understand the contributions, the nervous
system to the body, to the environment and back
all under one framework. So the uh the neuro
part refers to the importance um of the nervous
system in the brain. The ecological part refers to
the importance of environmental or ecological information. The nexus
part refers to the idea that we have to
find some way to systematically connect, right, there's kind
of a flow from brains into bodies into the
environment. And back, we have to understand our task
of understanding intelligent behavior and mind is to understand
that nexus that flow between those different uh spatial
and temporal scales. And coming up with a system
that makes sense um that is, is, you know,
have scientific virtues like simplicity and prediction and things
like that. And so um this is a, a
theory um or philosophy if you will about minds,
but it's also supposed to be a scientific research
program. And so, while it has these strong theoretical
and philosophical approaches, you know, stuff from ecological psychology,
complexity theory and things like that, it also offers
testable hypotheses. And so the theory um uh is,
do you want me to get into, can I
explain uh briefly the the different hypotheses? Y yes,
of course. Yes. OK, great. So um as a
testable kind of science of mind, science of intelligent
behavior, um next offers stick hypotheses which I'll go
over briefly. And so the first hypothesis um is
that the organism environment system is the privileged spatial
temporal scale of description to understand mind. So we
wanna understand what mind is. And I use mine
loosely like refer to intelligent behavior which could include
things like perception and action, but also you know,
memory and problem solving if we wanna understand that
really, we have to pay attention to the real
time interactions going on in the body and the
environment. So the environment will always be constraining the
body, the body will always be kind of constraining
the environment. So that's the first hypothesis. The second
hypothesis is that when it comes to the contributions
of the nervous system, the most significant contributions come
from the neuralation dynamic. But when it comes to
understanding coordinative behavior or problem solving really the action,
so to say is coming from neuro populations. So
it's not in single neurons, it's not in broad
regions of the brain, but it's in the connection
of populations of neurons. And so that's the significant
target of population. The third hypothesis is that those
neuro dynamics, uh what is really significant about them
is their low dimensional activity. But there's always gonna
be a lot of activity going on, we'll call
that high dimensional activity. But when we sift through
that high dimensional activity, we will zero in on
actually a much more sim simple structure of dynamics
that are driving the behavior. So the third hypothesis
is to discover to reveal those low dimensional dynamics
in the nervous system. The fourth hypothesis is that
uh just like the brain of the nervous system
um is most significantly about the low dimensional dynamics.
So too is the body. So the body, uh
this is again, hypothesis for the body is organized
into low-dimensional synergy and so synergies are particular organizations
of the body for purposes of intelligent behavior, for
purposes of, you know, swinging a bat and hitting
a ball or dribbling a football, right? The body
organizes into certain synergies in order to perform those
actions. And those synergies are essentially those low dimensional
um kinds of coordinative aspects of the body. The
fifth hypothesis is that mind again used very broadly,
is it fundamentally emerges at low dimensional scale of
these organism environment activities. So, although there's a lot
of uh neural activity happening all over the place,
although the body is constantly moving, although there's a
lot going on in the environment, really intelligent behavior,
mind perception problem. So all these things happen when
all of that collapses into low-dimensional uh structures. And
there's a coordinations between the low-dimensional structures of the
brain, the low dimensional structure of the body and
the low dimensional structure of the environment. And that's
how we are best poised to understand the brain
body and environment contribution to those activities. And so
the final uh hypothesis is that the neuro ecological
nexus theory explains those low dimensional structures in terms
of a finite set of organizational principles. So there's
not gonna be an infinite set of um rules
that guide the organization of my body, but there
will be a finite set of rules that guide
the organization of my body, for example. So things
like um critical states, criticality is one kind of
rule or principle that guides a lot of different
kinds of organization in the brain body and environment,
essentially to kind of flesh it out a little
bit. A critical state is when you have uh
a lot of high dimensional activity that gets to
a point where uh it is balanced between disorder
and order. So it's organized enough to maintain a
structure, but it's loose enough that it can adapt.
And so we call that that comes from physics.
And this is another key term in complexity science,
a critical state. And so I think it's likely
that neural activity, the body and the environment, they
reach these critical states in order to achieve uh
mind behavior activity and things like that. And so
as hypotheses, I think these are all empirically testable,
I think they all have to be theoretically reasonable.
Um But they can also all be wrong. Uh
If they were, if it wasn't possible for them
to be wrong, it wouldn't be a science, it
would just be a dogma and that's, that's not
fun. Mhm
Yeah, that, that's all great. And by the way,
I have a question saved for later on in
our conversation about the main challenges to your proposal
here. And we can come back to that. But
I wanted to ask you at this point specifically
when it comes to those hypothesis that you mentioned
there and looking at the evidence across the different
cognitive disciplines and so on at this point in
time, at least, and I hope this is not
uh too unfair of a question to ask at
this point because you're just suggesting this theory in
your book. But at this point in time, uh
how much do you think uh uh how much
support do you think they have scientifically, not only
empirically but also uh how the uh how accepted
they would be theoretically taking into account our current
state of the art in the cognitive sciences and
how much work and what sources of evidence would
we need to draw from? To uh really demonstrate
that it's potentially uh true or correct?
Yeah. So um it is a fair question and
I think in one way, um I think things
are going in my favor and they're going in
my favor because uh I can interpret a lot
of research that has been done in ecological psychology
in neuroscience through the lens of a neuro ecological
nexus theory. So I can point out at research
on network neuroscience that looks at critical states, I
can look at affordances perception that's been modeled uh
as synergies connected to, you know, self-organization and things
like that, right. So I can, I can pull
out these examples, right? And I can say, oh,
so this is support for hypothesis one, this is
support for this. The hard part though is um
supporting the theory as a whole, right? So the
tough part is gonna be running maybe an experiment
that's gonna hit on all those different levels, all
those different scales and that's gonna be really hard.
So, how would I uh test the neuro ecological
nexus theory? Uh AS a whole? Well, I would,
I would have to have a subject come in.
I would have to record from their brain. I
would have to record from their body. I would
have to record the environmental information. Oh, this is
just gonna be a huge amount of data, right?
It's gonna be enormous. I mean, look at, look
at the brain, all this, you know, brain research
that's been happening the last 10 years. Uh THE
brain initiative, the human brain project, they received billions
of dollars uh on the promise that in 10
years they would simulate a whole brain. Well, it
didn't happen, right? It didn't happen because they started
finding things like, well, there's actually not just a
few kinds of neurons in the brain or a
few kinds of cells. It's actually probably a couple
of 1000 different kinds of cells just in the
brain alone. So we might be kind of worse
off than we thought we were. It might be
much more complex than we thought it was. So
what we ended up seeing was a lot of
these approaches, they change their goal from, we're gonna
simulate a whole brain to we're gonna develop ways
to record data and share it with each other.
So that's just the first step, right? So a
way to, to handle all this data and, and,
and making sense of it is gonna be a
very big challenging part and that's just the brain
alone and I wanna come along and say I
wanna do that and the body and the environment,
right? It can be really hard to do, at
least in one kind of um straightforward, simple setup
that's gonna hit on all of those hypotheses. What
I'm gonna end up having to do is do
each one individually and then build up a case
and hopefully motivate that case. But again, each of
the hypotheses are hypotheses and they can be proven
wrong and it would require revising or undermining the
whole project. Um But I think there's a reasonable
shot that the hypotheses will turn out to be
supported because there is other work as I point
out in the book that supports each of the
hypotheses on their own. Does that address the, the
question? Uh Y
yes, but, but then uh a follow up to
that since you mentioned the human brain project and
all of that, uh when it comes to having
a better understanding or ideally a complete understanding of
how our human cognition works, our, how, how our
psychology works. And of course, the human brain project
is or is or was not just simply about
cognition or anything like that, it was about the
entirety of the human brain. And so I'm not
sure what kinds of claims exactly people were making
about how much of our psychology we could understand
through it. But let's say that your theory is
correct in comparison to something like the human brain
project. If people were to apply it, to have
a full understanding of our cognition, how much better
of a prospect do you think your theory would
be in comparison to just having a complete mapping
of the human brain when it comes to understanding
how cognition works?
Yeah. So um I think uh here's my uh
as, as they say, my hot take, um we
will not be able to explain most things. We
find interesting about cognition in mind by just looking
at what the brain is doing. The brain is
in some ways. It, it's the most, you know,
people describe it, you know, in a cliche, it's
the most complicated thing in the universe that we
know about. Um But in, in other ways, it's
not that interesting. It's just made up of cells
that are the same as the cells, you know,
in my stomach or on my arm or that
used to be in my hair. Um It, you
know, it's just the same kind of structure of
those cells they communicate um in interesting ways. Uh
THE communication, we see that kind of level of
communication and things like like beehives and ant colonies
uh in cities and the internet and stuff like
that. So, there's nothing really Irle about it. That's
particularly interesting. Um One of my um colleagues, uh
Maor Mangala, he's a neuroscientist uh uh who's highly
influenced by ecological psychology. And, and he often refers
to one of his colleagues, Damien Kelty Steven, who
describes the brain as a milkshake. And he says
that uh the brain is more like a milkshake
than it is like a computer. Uh MILKSHAKES are
made up of fats and proteins and sugars. Brains
are made up of fats and proteins and sugars.
Uh COMPUTERS are nothing like that, right? And the
swishing and swirling of, you know, the activity in
the blood and the oxygen and all that stuff,
it's more like a milkshake, right? And so my
hot take is when it comes to understanding um
you know, intelligence and memory and creativity and coordinations.
Um IT'S gonna have to include an understanding of
the body, it's gonna have to include an understanding
of body's en environment. Um And I think that's
something that um you know, Gibson was really focused
on. He wasn't necessarily like anti neuroscience, right? But
he was anti uh privileging the brain that the
brain is just, it's like, you know, kind of
like magic. Oh we worship the brain, right? And,
and, and it's like we've got the little, you
know, your little soul or your little homunculus sitting,
you know, controlling everything and it's like, no, no,
no, that's not happening, right? The brain is just
an organ in the body that plays a role
as the heart plays a role. Um YOU know,
different things like that. Um I was very privileged
to have um the eminent neuroscientist, uh Gary Bussi,
um who's one of my heroes in neuroscience. He's
um really emphasized, you know, dynamics and time and,
and that feature of the brain. But he endorsed
my book and, you know, one thing he said
was, um we really need to understand the fact
that the brain is just an organ, it's just
an organ in the skull. Um And it, you
know, you have to understand how it's situated in
the body. And there's a, a, you know, a,
a mutual kind of pathway between what the body
does and the, you know, the brain does and
it's not just about a top down kind of
control. And so I think it's not my approach,
you know, the neuro ecological nexus theory, I think
something along those lines is gonna have to be
true uh to explain even the most simple of
cognitive or mental phenomenon. Um And one last little
bit on, on my tirade, um a response to
your question is we already kind of know that
that project is gonna fail, not just um practically,
right? So it's not like, OK, uh give us
$10 billion over 10 years, we'll simulate a brain.
OK? That didn't happen. Uh So it failed. No,
no, even if it worked, I don't think it
would have provided the kind of uh explanations or
understanding we want because we've already done it with
simpler organism. So we've basically already done the human
brain project with uh little little tiny organism of
the ce again worm, which only has about, I
think it's like 307 neurons. And I mean, compare
that to humans that have about, you know, I
don't know what it is. 80 billion,
80 86 billion, I think,
yeah, 86 billion. That's just the neurons, right? So
uh not mentioning the connections and the supporting cells
like glia and stuff like that astrocytes, but we
already know the full mapping and all the connections
of a seal again and yet we can't predict
its movements. We still don't have an ex full
explanation about how it moves and coordinates its body.
That's only 300 neurons. All right. And we can't
do it with that. My thought is we can't
do it with that because it's not just about
the neurons, right? A full explanation of ac elegance,
intelligent behavior is gonna require yes, the neurons, but
also the body and the features of the environment
and that's gonna be just as important.
Well, uh I I guess that things are not
looking good for people who have brain centered approaches,
but also not for uh those sort of transhumanists
who would want to upload their brains to machines.
Yeah, I mean, we can talk about that if
you want. But I mean, my take is that
that's not a real possibility. Um THE uploading of,
of the mind um if there is any uploading,
it won't be completely you. Um IT may be
a feature of you but, but that's a whole
other interview. I'll have to come back in a
few months and then we can talk about transhumanism.
Yeah, I it was just me because II I
have this sort of beef with some
friends. You
don't take it too seriously. So, uh OK, so
uh let me just think here. So we were
talking about the ne next uh theory that you
presented there and you also explained how it integrates
ecological psychology, neuroscience and so on. So what is
the ecological brain then? Really?
Yeah. Um And it's like, as I was writing
the book, I realized I was like already finishing
the book and I said, I don't think I've
explained what I even mean by the title and
I think that happens too often. People have really
cool title and then they, they don't explain it.
I'm not saying mine's a cool title, but I
didn't explain it. Um So in the end, um
you know, II I mentioned it um in the
concluding chapter, what is the ecological brain? Well, the
ecological brain in short is the idea that a
brain is always a part of an ecology, right?
It's not this system, it's not this machine that
you can understand it in isolation. It's not like
I can explain, you know, I have my, you
know, my phone, it's not like I have my
phone and whether I'm sitting here in a nice
temperature controlled room or I sit outside and it's
warm or I go into a, um, a freezer
that's storing meat and, and other kinds of foods,
but it's still operating the same way. Right. The
ecology doesn't matter really to my iphone to a
certain degree, right? It gets too hot that it
stops working. But, but the brain is always a
part of ecology, the temperature of the body gravity,
all these things are acting on the brain and
the brain is also contributing to directing what ecology
the body will be in. So if I am
feeling really cold, right? And, and I'm sending information,
you know, across my body into my brain and
then my brain is now, you know, getting oh
that I'm not feeling too good. You know, my
brain might send out signals that says we need
to change the ecology, right? We need to be
in a different environment and those different environments are
gonna affect what it does, right? And I think
this is kind of the, you know, the point
that uh Bussi was saying when he, you know,
you know, endorsed, you know, my book is that
the brain is always a part of these ecologies.
The brain is not this isolated kind of system.
And so to understand what the brain is doing,
we have to understand that it is part of
that interactive kind of system and, and to that
and not to beat up on the uh transhumanists
again. But um and to beat up on the
human brain project, but that's what's kind of missing,
right? Is this lack of appreciation of what actually
should just be a really simple fact, right? Um
So in short, what is the ecological brain? The
ecological brain is the claim that like every other
aspect of organisms, the brain too is situated and
embedded in a certain kind of ecology and that's
gonna affect its functioning and what it does. Mhm
By the way, I hope this is not a
silly question. But since we're talking about ecology here,
there's also an approach coming mostly from biology, but
also nowadays, many anthropologists apply it or use it
as a framework. There is behavioral ecology and then
in the context of anthropology, human behavioral ecology that
is people look at different aspects, different factors that
differ across different ecologies and then try to understand
uh in terms of our behavioral outputs our behavior.
Uh IF there's regularities in terms of, if people
are exposed to this or that technological factors, uh
if there are some tendencies to uh develop societies
with certain characteristics or they themselves as individuals behaving
in certain ways, so does uh it connect or
has any relationship to that in any way because
I was trying to understand if, um, that aspect
of biology could also play a role here or
not.
Yeah. Absolutely. I think it's definitely friendly at a
minimum. It's friendly to those kinds of approaches. Um,
WHAT you're talking about as well. I think, um,
there might be some overlap with what I'm talking
about, what you're talking about and then with something
called developmental systems theory. And so developmental systems theory
is its approach to biology and psychology and it's
come to influence um even things like such as
understand the criminal justice system um and things like
that. But the idea is always that it's these
whole systems that undergo change and adaptation. So it's
uh I'm not what you're specifically referring to. I
don't wanna say what I'm about to say, applies
to that, but this applies to what I'm saying
and what the developmental systems theorists say they are
uh anti reductionist in the sense that um it's
not just genes, for example, as maybe the most
reductionist approach to biology, it's not just the gene
that is uh driving um you know, um in
organisms, uh th the, and it's not just the
gene that is being acted on by selective pressures,
but actually, it's the gene part of the organism,
part of the environment, that whole system is what's
being selected for. So, for example, um you know,
when beavers, um you know, they have a certain
kind of body. They exist in certain kind of
environments. They build certain kinds of dams, their teeth
work on both kinds of trees and wood in
that area. If those beaver families survive, it's because
it's the whole system that survived. It's the, the
fur, the tail, the teeth, the wood, the water,
all of that is a developing system over time.
And so it wouldn't make sense to just focus
on what is, what are the genes doing, right?
Put those same genes, you know, in a different
body or put those beavers in a different environment
and they might not be selected for or they
might be selected for. The point is, is that
it takes this whole entire kind of system to
be selected for. Is that what you're, does this
fit with what this behavioral kind of and the
anthropological stuff you're talking about?
Yes. And I guess that perhaps one of the
things you were alluding to there, I'm not sure
if directly or not when you mentioned the example
of the beaver disease, uh niche construction as well
or
not. Yeah, absolutely. Um I think even people who
were the most, uh and I use, you know,
scare quotes again, the most reductionist about biology, I
think even they, um, you know, you push them
enough and they'll say it can't possibly be just
the genes. So even so Richard Dawkins was one
of the big proponents of the gene centric approach.
He also had a book called The Extended Phenotype,
right? And he talks about how, you know, these
behavioral things that happen in the world, the use
of wood and the environment and stuff like that.
He'd like to frame it in terms of extensions
of the genes. I would just, I actually, I,
you know, I'm reading the same thing that he's
saying and I come to different conclusions. It makes
me think that gene is less important. But, you
know, that's uh the biologist. Uh
Sure. So um I, I mentioned this question earlier,
but what would you say are perhaps some of
the main challenges to your ees to your next
uh framework?
Yeah. So there's uh there's challenges across the board,
right? So, um you know, conceptually, right, um when
I say mind, what do I mean by mind?
Um DO I also mean consciousness, do I just
mean problem solving? Do I mean perception action, right?
And these things are all debatable, right? So um
some people argue that perception of action is not
mind, right? It's not cognition, it's something quite distinct,
it's something that's more like me. You know, again,
I like using these quotes. It's more like mere
reflex, right? Whereas cognition is it allows you to
make decisions and intervene on mere reflexes. So, so
I've, I've already got challenges conceptually, right? Method of
logically, how do I put these things in practice?
I talked about that a few minutes ago, right?
If the human brain project with billions of dollars
in time and thousands of scientists couldn't come up
with a full simulation of just the brain. How
am I gonna basically try and do uh an
afforded simulation from brain body and environment? That's methodologically,
that's gonna be very challenging and then theoretically right
do and this overlaps with, you know, concepts as
well, but are affordances something that need to take
the nervous system into account? Um Am I missing
the, the whole point of what Gibson was saying?
Uh THIS is, you know, kind of push back.
I've gotten from some ecological psychologist, right. Affordances only
exist in the environment and the organism and where
they meet and if you go too low into
the brain, then you're missing it. If you go
too high, then you're out of the system, right?
That's a theoretical issue. So I, I think I
am open to being, you know, attacked and criticized
in those three ways. But in particular, I think
um I face criticisms both from people who I
think would be friendly um to ecological psychology. But
I also faced criticisms from people who are against
ecological psychology. So people who are friendly might be
an activist. So an active cognition or an activism
is um a kind of popular approach to understanding
what it is to be an intelligent living organism.
And sometimes there's some overlap with what ecological psychologists
say, but not always. And so there's that approach.
Why not do um why not call my book,
The Inactivate Brain, right? They might wanna say that
and that they'd say that's better than the ecological
brain. Maybe I'd have to argue with them about
that. Right? Then I also need to argue against
people who are against ecological psychology and people who
are proponents of computational representational approaches, proponents of mechanistic
approaches, proponents of reductionism, right? My book uh as
I say towards the end, uh I say something
along the lines of you might have noticed that
I didn't explain anything. I didn't describe anything about
my approach with computing, representing, I didn't describe any
mechanisms and I didn't reduce anything. And for some
people, if you miss, if you're missing out on
some of these and you're just not doing science,
right? If you're not providing a mechanistic account, whatever
that is, we could talk about that also. But
if you're not giving a mechanistic account, then you're
not giving an explanation. So I'm pushing back, it's
just, it's a different way of doing science also
that is pushing back against, you know, more reductionist
approaches. Um PUSHING back against mechanistic approaches and then
pushing back against, you know, the apparent richness of
the computer metaphor and a representational approaches. So I,
I've got, I've got, I've got a line of
people, they, they, they're taking their number and they're,
they're ready to come in and get me.
So I have two questions. One about one specific
thing that you mentioned there and a follow up
to the challenges here. So you mentioned uh mechanistic
explanations there and you that many people would be
dismissive of your framework if it doesn't provide, provide
them with the mechanistic explanation for whatever aspect of
human cognition we're studying here. I guess. So um
I mean, what is a mechanistic explanation exactly, particularly
for the people who might not be familiar with
this kind of terminology? And what would be, let's
say in this case, a non mechanistic explanation?
Yeah, good, good. So this is a very big
issue and um the philosophy of science. Um And
uh I actually, I think it's a big issue
in science, the life science for practicing scientists, they
should think about this. Um So the mechanistic approach
um historically goes back to Newton and Descartes where
they um were thinking about say the solar system
as a kind of machine, right? Uh PLANETS that
are kind of, you know, moving around in a
certain way, right? Almost like pivoting on a kind
of central piece which is the sun. Uh And
then the body of des Cartes who's famous for
his dualism, his mind, body, dualism. He still was
a great anatomist and he spent a lot of
his time studying the structures of the body and
he thought the body was very much like a
like a mechanical system. So for example, uh if
I had my hand, if I were to open
up my forearm, you'd see all these like tendons.
And if I were to pull one, my finger
would move, right? He said this is like it's
a machine, right? We are living machines, fast forward
a few 100 years. And um the mechanistic approach
in the late nineties, early two thousands in the
philosophy of science, there was a group of philosophers
who said, what do scientists do when they try
to explain something in the life sciences, when they're
trying to explain a cell or an organism or
an environment or something like that, how do they
explain digestion or memory or whatever? And these, and
these people said, well, what they do is they,
they try to isolate as much as possible, their
target, they try to break it apart, they try
to understand the contributions of the parts and then
they try to understand what they do together. And
so you have a mechanism when you can say
this is the phenomenon, be it, you know, memory
like long term potentiation or digestion or whatever. And
here's the starting point, here's what each of the
parts do. And here's the ending point. Now you
got a memory. Now you have digested food. Now
you have a new baby, right? Um And so
this was, this is a very general sense in
which you have a mechanism. The problem that the
mechanist quickly um realized was you can't always break
things apart and give an understanding of them outside
of their context, right? If you have say, um,
you know, uh a toilet and the toilet has,
you know, a handle and the handle lifts, the
little thing on the inside which lets the water
run. And if you wanna unders, if you want
to describe the mechanism of how a toilet flushes
that handle is always just a handle, that flapper
is always just a flapper. The seat is always
just a seat and you just add them together.
But pretty much most things actually in nature are
not like that, pretty much things always require a
context and their capacities require the situation, understanding the
situation that they're in. And so this mechanistic approach
um had some problems and required some modification. So
people started including descriptions of things as being decomposable.
So coming apart uh non decomposable. So systems that
um only work when they are a complete whole
and then you also have descriptions of nearly decomposable
systems. So systems where you could kind of maybe
get an idea of what the parts are contributing.
Uh YOU know, things like that. This has been
of the most popular um way of understanding explanation
in the life sciences and philosophy of science. And
it, it I think it tracks well with what
scientists, especially like neuroscientists and biologists are doing. So
what would be a non mechanistic approach? Well, a
non mes mechanistic approach to explanation could be something
like a mathematical description. Um Einstein's equation uh Newton's
um differential equations of the solar system, these types
of things are not mechanistic, they have variables in
the equations that refer to real things in the
world. But when you are trying to understand how
those things interact, you're paying more attention to the
relationship of variables than you are as opposed to
the specifics. Uh So you kind of, you're abstracting
away a bit. Uh So that's one example of
a non mechanistic um approach. Um Yeah. Do,
do you think that in this particular case, if
we would have a mathematical explanation, perhaps one of
the reasons why maybe I don't know, psychologists and
neuroscience, neuroscientists, uh I mean, at least a big
number of them wouldn't be too fond of uh
an approach based also on complexity theory because I
don't know, perhaps the mathematics there is a little
bit too complicated for most people. I mean, I,
I'm not trying to claim that pe people from
those disciplines can't learn it. It's just that perhaps
they are not used to that level of mathematics.
I don't know,
I think it's an excellent point. Um And, and
I think, you know, now we're, now we're psychologizing
our scientists, right? We're trying to, and this might
require um its own kind of study, right? The
nature of, of, of scientists and what they, they
prefer, you know, we could say again, broadly speaking,
um people go into physics because they want to
understand the general principles of how things are organized,
right? They wanna understand um you know, entropy, you
know, of, of, of the particles in a container.
But they don't really care about the specific particle.
But someone might be interested in doing chemistry because
they care about the specific chemical structure, but they
care about biology because they care about identifying the
specific cells and the organs and how those things
come together. And so there might be a tension
here where someone who's more, you know, quote unquote
physics minded might say, oh, you biologist, you care
about all those methods, details. But what are you
really telling us? That's interesting. Similarly, the biologists you
know, might be looking at the physicist and saying
all you're giving me is all this crazy math
and you haven't really told me how anything actually
worked, right? It's like taking a car, right? Do
we wanna understand how combustion works or do we
want to understand how the parts fit together? Well,
I think these are different kinds of temperament, but
my bet is that when it comes to understanding
mind, cognition, perception, memory, all this kind of stuff,
right? That these emerge, these these properties, these abilities
emerge from highly complex systems, highly complicated systems with
many degrees of freedom, right? And keeping track of
all those is gonna be really difficult. And in
that sense, I think going the more kind of
physics route where you don't care about the location
of every particle inside the container, but you care
about general kind of patterns of behavior. I think
that's gonna give us more scientific virtue like uh
manipulation, prediction, things like that with that sound is
the physics approach gonna develop any medication. Is the
physics approach gonna help, you know, cure cancer? II,
I think it could contribute to it. But I
think in, in that way, the kind of, you
know, medical approach, the anatomical approach, I think that's
gonna benefit uh from having someone who's more uh
biological mechanistic minded, who wants to focus on the
the wet sticky detail, right? But as we're seeing,
I think there's, you know, a co evolution of
the two to help us understand mine, it's gonna
take both approaches, but I lean towards my intuition
is that it leans more towards the physics kinds
of stuff.
So let me ask you one last question then
still related to the challenges to your proposal. Because
I mean, I guess that one of the main
things that you pointed to here is the fact
that you would have to convince many different kinds
of people from the different disciplines, different theoretical frameworks
and so on. So do you think that perhaps
one of the challenges here and it, it's not
only to your framework or to convincing other people
that potentially your framework is correct, but also perhaps
a broader question that applies to the to your
book in general also to perhaps understanding why it
is that different disciplines, even though they might be
focusing on similar objects of study might diverge so
much historically. Do you think that has anything to
do with how difficult it is to have interdisciplinary
in academia and the university context? Because people are
trained in specific areas, specific domains with specific theoretical
approaches, methodologies and so on. And of course, then
they have their careers and it's based on the
kinds of things they have been working with the
frameworks they have been applying. And of course, it's
also uh many times extremely difficult for people to
acquire enough knowledge, enough competence about other disciplines and
methodologies and frameworks. So do you think that perhaps
uh in the context of your book in general?
Um THIS is uh something that we need, we
need to take into account and perhaps presents a
big obstacle here.
I think it's an excellent point. Um I wish
I had asked you to ask me this question
because it, it's it, it is such an excellent
point. Um You know, the, the way that yeah,
the way that knowledge acquisition happens, um you know,
in, in our systems and our culture is to
have this kind of, you know, siloed, you know,
discipline, you have a, you know, you have your
Department of Physics, your Department of Chemistry, you know,
et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. Um And for
good reason, right. Because you can only do so
much. So, I'm, I'm kind of repeating a little
bit what you're saying in agreement, right? You can
only get, you know, you get your ph getting
one phd is hard enough, right? And then getting
good at it is a whole other level, right?
And making contributions and pushing the field forward, whatever
the field it is, it's literature, history, economics, physics,
right. Getting good enough because there's so we know
so much, we have so much information that we
have to deal with just within one discipline alone.
Um How are we supposed to engage with these
really complicated difficult topics like mine, cognition, intelligence. Well,
one thing is to say um the discipline that
I do, that's the right discipline and right. So
I'm a neuroscientist and I care about biochemistry and
that's how you're gonna do it, right? That's one
way to approach it. And you say everyone else
is wrong, another way to approach it is to
say I'm a neuroscientist. I care about the biochemistry,
but I know I need to talk to other
people who do other things and I need to
make connections and you know, to see how we
connect in that way to give a more complete
account, more complete explanation. But when is that supposed
to happen? When does that conversation happen? Not in
the journals? Right? In the journals, they just publish
very specific kind of issues, right? Very very limited,
right? You look at a neuroscience journal and they,
they say, well, we are now looking at molecule
X that's an AX on receptor 32. And this,
and I spend my whole career, you know, doing
that. Well, what does that have to do with
cognition? If anything? Right? I, I don't know, but
someone needs to be talking about this. Uh AND,
and, and trying to bring these things together, the
establishment um doesn't reward that kind of work, right?
Whenever you publish in the top journals, you're usually
very focused. When you get grant money, it's to,
to look at very specific kinds of issues where
you already kind of know how the problem is
gonna be solved. You kind of, you end up
especially in the US institutions with, with grant funding,
you kind of have to already have succeeded in
your project in order to get the money. Um
AND, and, and so where's the risk and where's
the interdisciplinary when it's other people who are very
specific and focused, who are making the the decisions
about whether your grant gets funded or your paper
gets published. So the system itself makes it very
difficult to um embrace these multi scale kinds of
approaches. Um As I think my approach is, I
think sometimes this is the luxury of being a
philosopher is um I get to kind of, you
know, I get, I get to dabble in these
different areas, right? Um But I also thought at
least personally, if I want to explain or at
least engage with the sciences of the things I'm
interested in like cognition or intelligence, I think I
should have had some training to see what these
scientists do. And so I have, I have training
in experimental psychology and neuroscience because I wanted to
see kind of what the philosophers are saying. And
if it makes any sense, I wanted to see
what the neuroscientists are doing that the philosophers are
right or wrong about, but it's been really hard
to do. Um And not everyone wants to do
that. Um NOR should they uh you end up
getting more successful if you focus on a limited
range of things and get really good at that.
So, yeah, I think interdisciplinary, I think um the
way the system is set up of reward in
academia and things like that, I think that's definitely
poses a challenge to providing a multidisciplinary multis scale
account of very complicated phenomenon. Mhm
You know, one of the reasons why I asked
you that question is that, I mean, perhaps uh
I have a privileged position because I'm able to
do this full time. And I talk, I get
to talk with people from many, many different disciplines,
mostly the psychological, behavioral evolutionary sciences, but also from
other areas. And I mean, I understand it's perfectly
understandable that people of course cannot learn all of
these and neither can I, I mean, I only
know tiny bits of uh everything, let's say. But,
um, I mean, it's perfectly understandable. But on the
other hand, sometimes I see a lot of people
from this different disciplines dealing with the same subjects
talking past each other just because they are not
versed on what the other people, what the other
person is working on. The kinds of theoretical approaches.
They have the kinds of methodologies, they apply uh
concepts and so on and, and, and sometimes it's
really, it, it can become really frustrating to see
that perhaps people are clinging so much to their
own. I don't know, pet theories or pet methodologies
or their own uh preferred frameworks. And just very,
and perhaps this is the part that frustrates me
the most just easily dismiss uh some other things
that or, or other approaches that other people have
and many times it's because they don't even have
a good enough understanding of what the, the other
people are coming from because again, they don't have
enough knowledge about it. I mean, ii, I don't
know if you agree with what I'm saying here
or if you, we and the criticisms of it.
No, I agree. And I'll take you one step
further and here's another hot take. I think a
lot of scientists um don't even really understand the
commitments of their own discipline. And I say that
as a matter of fact, not as a value
judgment because there is no need to question uh
the commitments, right? Um So Thomas Coon, uh historian,
philosopher of science, he talks about normal science. Normal
Science is when you have a community of people
who speak the same language, right? So maybe we'll
take a biologist, they kind of understand what a
gene is, what a cell is. Uh They have
shared methods like, you know, basic statistical analysis. They
all understand that they all, you know, read the
same journals, they all um teach the same textbooks,
right? They all have an idea of what experiments
should look like and what an answer should look
like. And this is just normal everyday kind of
science. They don't have to question whether a gene
really is exist or whether, you know, what is
a spell or what, you know, are these statistical
methods found? They don't have to uh and they
probably as a discipline would be worse off if
they paid attention to that, they can make a
lot of progress by just accepting the paradigm, right?
The problem though is when you start hitting, you
know, at least what Thomas Coon said, you start
hitting anomalies like, right? Too many things that you
can't explain or when things get too messy, that's
when scientists are questioning their paradigm. And so I
totally understand and I totally respect uh the, the
day to day scientist who doesn't have to question
the foundation and they don't have to pay attention
to anybody else. Um But if you have that,
that tendency, if you have that personality, that questions
things, um it's very easy to find what people
don't know about even their own discipline.
OK, great. So perhaps this is a good point
to wrap up the interview. And the book is
again the ecological brain unifying the sciences of brain,
body and environment. I'm leaving a link to it
in the description box of the interview. And Doctor
Favela, apart from the book, would you like to
tell people again, where can, where they can find
you and your work on the internet?
Yeah, so you can um you can find me.
Um My website is a little bit um The
link is a little bit long. Um But I'll
ask Ricardo to post it, but it's uh Luis
H Favela one word dot Wix site, Wix si
te.com/luis H Favela. Um If you go there, you,
you can get links to my papers and see
what's, what's going on. What I'm up to. Um
You can feel free to email me um at
Luis dot fella at ucf.edu that's also um on
the website as well. Um But yeah, and you
can pick up the book at any, any seller,
books, Barnes and Nobles Amazon. Um Yeah, glad to
be here. We're uh happy uh to talk about
this stuff.
No, it's always a pleasure to have everyone. Doctor
Fave and I really love the book. So I
really hope that uh people from the audience also
buy it and read it. It's a very interesting
read. And thank you so much again for coming
on the show. And I really hope to have
another chance of talking with you somewhere in the
future. So that'd
be great. Thank you, Ricardo.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting
B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger, Ken Herz
and Lain Jung Y and the K Hes Mark
Smith Jungle. Tom Hummel s friends, David W and
the desario Roman Roach Diego and Jan Punter Romani
Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo Stassi, Nale
Me, Gary G Alman, Samo Zal Ari and Ye
Polton John Barboza, Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner
Douglas Fry Franca Gilon Cortez or Solis, Scott Zachary
FW Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgino Luke Loki,
Georgio, Theophano Chris. Williams and Peter Wo David Williams
Di Costa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Chao, Marie
Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Fist Larry Dey junior, Old
Einon Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur by Robert Grassy
Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radis Mark Temple,
Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson Chris to Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin
Gilbert Jessica. No, Linda Brendan Nicholas Carlson Ismael Bensley
Man George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perlis Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular
J Ner Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins
of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A
special thanks to my producers is our web, Jim
Frank Luca Stina, Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes
Dixon Benedikt Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
John Carl, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And
to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan
Knits and Rosie. Thank you for all.